Responsible HPC
=====

Prospero, and the data centre infrastructure needed to cool it, consumes a significant quantity of electricity - roughly 400,000 kWh per year, representing approximately 3% of all electricity consumed by Liverpool John Moores University. Although the carbon cost of a kilowatt hour (kWh) continues to fall thanks to an ever-increasing fraction of renewable energy generation, the UK's national grid has yet to be fully decarbonised. Prospero is therefore presently responsible for the production of approximately 2000 tonnes of CO2 per year. For context, 2000 tonnes of CO2 is roughly what is produced by 80 people flying from the UK to the Canary Islands and back again.

We are taking steps to help mitigate the environmental impact of advanced research computing at LJMU. We encourage users to move to more efficient codes and workloads, and to this end ITS provides quarterly energy reporting to users to make them aware of their energy consumption. We use BIOS configurations to reduce the power consumption of compute nodes when they are idling. We work with our vendors to minimise "embedded CO2", i.e. that produced in the manufacture and shipping of Prospero's hardware. As Prospero's hardware components reach the end of their useful life, they are responsibly recycled via an arrangement with our prime hardware vendor, HPE. This scheme returns a "buy back" value to the university, which is directly fed into the LJMU `student support fund <https://www.ljmu.ac.uk/discover/student-support/cost-of-living-support>`_.

